---
layout: post
title: 'DateTime.ToUniversalTime *Should* Throw Exceptinos.'
tags: ['.NET Development', 'Design/Coding Guidance', 'Microsoft', 'Software Development', 'msmvps', 'June 2007']
---
[Source](http://blogs.msmvps.com/peterritchie/2007/06/12/datetime-touniversaltime-should-throw-exceptinos/ "Permalink to DateTime.ToUniversalTime *Should* Throw Exceptinos.")

# DateTime.ToUniversalTime *Should* Throw Exceptinos.

A recent [.NET Base ClassLibrary blog post][1] points out that [DateTime.ToUniversalTime][2] does not throw an exception for overflow values.

This circumvents different Microsoft-sanctioned guidelines about using exceptions for exceptional situations, error reporting guidelines, not using return codes to communicate errors (which essentially what this is), the Method/TryMethod pattern, allowing the error to propagate to a level that knows how to deal with it, etc.

I would recommend having overflows handled as exceptions and the addition of a TryToUniversalTime. If the Method/TryMethod pattern is the favoured approach to providing two methods that result in the same thing–one without exceptions–this is impossible if the _Method_ doesn't throw exceptions. i.e. you can't use Method/TryMethod pattern and therefore if you provided another method to convert to universal time that **did** throwexceptions,you'd be forced to implement a completely different pattern.

The argument will be that ToUniversalTime can't change because there's code that assumes it doesn't throw an exception. I would argue that this isn't a realistic case and that code that uses ToUniversalTime simply does no error checking because it can't: MinValue and MaxValue are valid values you can't use them to decide whether an error has occurred. 

The argument to not change a defective method because something may depend on that defect is just wrong and is used too much as a crutch to avoid not having to deal with redesigning a proper method and dealing with the consequences.

This would apply equally to TimeZone.ToUniversalTime.

[1]: http://blogs.msdn.com/bclteam/archive/2007/06/12/datetime-touniversaltime-returns-maxvalue-minvalue-on-overflow-josh-free.aspx
[2]: http://msdn2.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.datetime.touniversaltime(vs.80).aspx


